Yesterday, we learned that the economy
lost another 651,000 jobs in the month of
February, which brings the total number of jobs
lost in this recession to 4.4 million.
The unemployment rate has now surpassed 8 percent,
the highest rate in a quarter century.
These aren't just statistics, but hardships
experienced personally by millions of Americans
who no longer know how they'll pay their bills,
or make their mortgage, or raise their families.
From the day I took office, I knew that solving this
crisis would not be easy, nor would it happen overnight.
And we will continue to face difficult
days in the months ahead. But I also believe that
we will get through this -- that if we act swiftly
and boldly and responsibly, the United States
of America will emerge stronger
and more prosperous than it was before.
That's why my administration is committed
to doing all that's necessary to address this crisis
and lead us to a better day. That's why we're moving
forward with an economic agenda that will jumpstart
job creation, restart lending, relieve responsible
homeowners, and address the long-term economic
challenges of our time:  the cost of health care,
our dependence on oil, and the state of our schools.
To prevent foreclosures for as many as 4 million
homeowners -- and lower interest rates and lift
home values for millions more -- we are implementing
a plan to allow lenders to work with borrowers
to refinance or restructure their mortgages.
On Wednesday, the Department of Treasury and Housing
and Urban Development released the guidelines that
lenders will use for lowering mortgage payments.
This plan is now at work.
To restore the availability of affordable loans
for families and businesses -- not just banks
-- we are taking steps to restart the flow of credit
and stabilize the financial markets.
On Thursday, the Treasury Department and the
Federal Reserve launched the Consumer and Business
Lending Initiative -- a plan that will generate up to
a trillion dollars of new lending so that families
can finance a car or college education -- and small
businesses can raise the capital that will create jobs.
And we've already begun to implement the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act -- a plan that will
save and create over 3.5 million jobs over the next
two years -- jobs rebuilding our roads and bridges,
constructing wind turbines and solar panels,
expanding broadband and mass transit. And because
of this plan, those who have lost their job in this
recession will be able to receive extended unemployment
benefits and continued health care coverage, while 95
percent of working Americans will receive
a tax break beginning April 1st.
Of course, like every family going through hard times,
our country must make tough choices.
In order to pay for the things we need --
we cannot waste money on the things we don't.
My administration inherited a $1.3 trillion budget deficit
the largest in history. And we've inherited a budgeting
process as irresponsible as it is unsustainable.
For years, as Wall Street used accounting tricks to conceal
costs and avoid responsibility, Washington did, too.
These kinds of irresponsible budgets --
and inexcusable practices --
are now in the past. For the first time in many years
my administration has produced a budget that represents an
honest reckoning of where we are and where we need to go.
It's also a budget that begins to make the hard choices
that we've avoided for far too long --
a strategy that cuts where we must and invests where we need.
That's why it includes $2 trillion in deficit reduction
while making historic investments in America's future.
That's why it reduces discretionary spending for non-defense
programs as a share of the economy by more than 10 percent
over the next decade -- to the lowest level since they began
keeping these records nearly half a century ago.
And that's why on Wednesday, I signed a presidential
memorandum to end unnecessary no-bid contracts
and dramatically reform the way contracts are awarded --
reforms that will save the American people
up to $40 billion each year.
Finally, because we cannot bring our deficit down
or grow our economy without tackling the skyrocketing
cost of health care, I held a health care summit
on Thursday to begin the long-overdue process of reform.
Our ideas and opinions about how to achieve this reform
will vary, but our goal must be the same: quality, affordable
health care for every American that no longer overwhelms the
budgets of families, businesses, and our government.
Yes, this is a moment of challenge for our country.
But we've experienced great trials before.
And with every test, each generation has found
the capacity to not only endure, but to prosper --
to discover great opportunity in the midst of great crisis.
That is what we can and must do today.
And I am absolutely confident that is what we will do.
I'm confident that at this defining moment
we will prove ourselves worthy of the sacrifice
of those who came before us
and the promise of those who will come after.
Thank you.